

                             Sakai Site Sections


                               October 2, 2005

         Please direct questions or comments about this document to:

        Glenn R. Golden, Sakai Framework Architect, ggolden@umich.edu


                                    DRAFT



Introduction

This documents the Sakai framework's new features to Site; Site Sections.
These are new in Sakai 2.1.


Section


A Site Section helps you organize your Site. Where site pages organize the
presentation of tools in the site, site sections organize the participants,
their roles and permissions, and the related entities in a site.

When a site has sections, each section has a separate participant list
(authorization group), with a list of users, each with a role, and granted
permissions for site and other application activities.  The authorization
group for a section can also be linked to an external provider to pick up
the users and roles from an enterprise system.

Sections also have a title and description for display purposes.

A site with sections still has a main participant list (authorization
group) to control access to the site, and to control the permissions of
related data entities that are not sectioned.

Sections are optional in a site.  A site with no sections acts as it did
before. The site's main participant list, roles and permissions then apply
to the site and all the related data entities (those that claim the site as
their context).


Section Awareness in Applications


Applications can choose to be section aware.  For those that are, the end
user can be presented with a list of site sections, and can choose to
"section" a data entity (such as an announcement, resource or schedule
item).  To section an entity, the entity becomes related to one or more
sections of a site, rather than just to the site as a whole.

Section aware applications can use the section information to filter or
sort the display of entities.

Section information can also be used in security checks on the entity.
When a sectioned entity is part of a security query, the list of
authorization groups that are consulted to determine access will include
those of the selected sections, and not include the authzGroup of the site.
 Entities that are not sectioned continue to use the site's authzGroup when
performing security checks.

The Site API is used to create, maintain, and query the sections related to
a site.  The AuthzGroup API is used to maintain the users, roles and
permissions related to the site and to each section.


Section API


A site section is, first, a Sakai entity, so has:
    - id
    - reference
    - properties

In addition, it has:
    - title
    - description

The title is what an application would use to present the section in the
user interface.  The description is a longer text description of the
section.

Since the section is an entity, it has a related authorization group.
AuthzGroups are related to their entities by this rule in Sakai:

      The AuthzGroup ID is the related entity's REFERENCE.

The importance of this is: when an application stores section information
for an entity, it needs to store the section Reference (not the id).  The
reference can be used with the Site or SiteService API to find the Section
object, and can be used when producing the AuthzGroups for the entity for
security checks.

Applications that edit sections also need to use the reference when forming
the AuthzGroup id for the section, to modify the user / realm / permission
information and the external provider id.


SiteService API


Section related calls in the SiteService API allow you to:
    - find a section given a reference or id
    - create a section in a site, given a title and description (no need to
      edit the site)
    - remove a section from the site, given the reference or id (no need to
      edit the site)
    - update the title and description of a section (no need to edit the
      site)
    - list the sections of a site, given the site id (returning a Collection
      of Section objects)
    - find out if any sections are defined for a site, given the site id.

The Site API section related calls include:
    - list the sections of the site (returning a Collection of Section
      objects)
    - find a section by id
    - find out if any sections are defined for the site

The SiteEdit API section related maintenance calls include:
    - add a new section
    - remove a given section


Course Sections and Site Sections


The Sections application, also new in Sakai 2.1, is related to but separate
from the site section features.  The Sections application models an
educational institution's course sectioning.  When a course is being
offered in many sections, the sections application can be used to model
this data in Sakai, and to relate course sections to sites, letting a
single site be used for many course sections.

The Sections application models course sections using site sections,
extending the information kept in the site section API with additional
information per section, and adding business logic related to creating and
populating the sections.

Any section aware application that is interested only in sectioning
entities, in getting the list of sections for a site, and then using the
sectioning information per entity for sorting, filtering and security, can
use the Site API for all its needs.  Every section modeled in the Sections
application is reflected in the sections defined for the site.

Only those applications that are interested in the additional information
that the Sections application models with each section need to interact
with the Sections application APIs directly.

<end>

