


                             Sakai Authn Portal


                               Glenn R. Golden
                          Sakai Framework Architect
                                May 16, 2005

The Sakai Authn Portal provides access to authentication functions.  Users
can login or logout from the Sakai system using the Authn portal.  These
functions are also available from the Charon Site portal, but the Authn
portal gives a convenient URL to encode a login or logout from a system
that is running within Sakai.

The Authn Login URL

If an application finds that it would like to now let the end user
authenticate, it can redirect the user's browser to the login URL:

      /authn/login

If a particular url needs to be visited once the end user successfully
authenticates, this can be added to the redirect url:

      /authn/login?url=http://whatever.url/you/need

After the redirect, the end user will be sent through the Sakai
authentication process.  If this is handled by a container login, that will
be invoked.  Otherwise the end user will see the login screen and be
prompted to enter user id and password.

Once the user successfully authenticates, they will be redirected to the
specified URL.  If no URL is specified, the end user is redirected to the
portal URL.

The Authn Logout URL

If an application finds that it would like to now get the user to logout,
or would like to encode a logout button, they can redirect the user's
browser to the logout URL, or encode the URL in a link or button:

      /authn/logout

If a particular url needs to be visited once the end is logged out, this
can be added to the redirect url:

      /authn/logout?url=http://whatever.url/you/need

After the redirect, the end user will be sent through the Sakai logout
process.  Once the user is logged out, they will be redirected to the
specified URL.  If no URL is specified, the end user is redirected to the
configured logged-out URL.

Direct Use of the Login Tool Helper

An application can use the login tool directly, by invoking it as a helper
tool.  The Authn portal is another option, if the application wants a
simpler way of doing this.  This code is also a clear example of how to
invoke the login helper tool from a Sakai application (or any other helper
tool).

